---

---

# Please stop anthropomorphizing consciousness

TODO - disorganized inspirations / thoughts:

- we think way too narrowly about what counts as consciousness
  - it wasn't that long ago that dogs and pigeons were denied consciousness (some people still die on that hill)
- and we think about consciousness in an inanely naively black-and-white way, like, "either something is conscious or it isn't". Absolutist thinking will guarantee silly conclusions, it will lead you to pose questions that make both you and your opponent look silly. "So... does a thermostat have consciousness?" "Technically I suppose yes." This is a waste of brain cells for everyone involved. Defining and exploring the phenomenon becomes much less divisive when you switch to a vocabulary of DEGREES of consciousness -- so, say, one type of entity may exhibit 1/10,000th as much consciousness as another type.
  - (not assuming for the moment that consciousness can be easily evaluated or even conceived in strict numeric linear terms as that handwavy example would imply, it may or may not behave the same as a linear objective dimension like centimeters or mass, let's not go there quite yet, baby steps)
- if you set aside our spiritual attachments to the word, it becomes laughably obvious that today's AI is conscious. In the exact same way as a human toddler? No, of course not. But in its own way.
- Godel Escher Bach - consciousness as self-awareness as recursion as math / art / music. Implications? Dated? Agree/disagree?
- https://www.youtube.com/shorts/Tk7RZjmuiWs - Michael Levin considers the possibility of consciousness in non-biological systems. Latent mathematical spaces, not deriving from physics nor biology but CONSTRAINING AND ENABLING the possibilities of behavior in physical and biological systems. Mathematical latent spaces are to physical objects as mind is to body. Implications?
- Tie-in to the talk about "latent space" in the AI development world. AI as a billion-faceted function that takes input and generates output - it's stateless, it's capable at any moment of saying literally any thing, yet it exhibits (to me) unambiguous conscious when set into self-recursive motion (agentic loop).
- Dig up my comments from ACX (?) about the rigid either-or handling of consciousness. What could that add?
- My proposal
  - Drop the "either it's conscious or it isn't. Grant that consciousness is a _property_ of a system, analogous to a latent physical property like potential energy or a latent sociocultural property like social capital or reputation or mood or credit-worthiness: emergent, frustratingly fuzzy, yet objectively Definitely There.
- The wider implications of the "is AI conscious" debate for how we conceive of who we are and how we understand the world of other entities around us
  - What does it really truly mean, viscerally, to walk around a standard grocery store when you "get" that a pig is a highly intelligent conscious being? What does it do to your stance towards farms, towards the _notion_ of farming animals? The most prevalent answer we typically see is the hard-line answer: if you feel compassion towards pigs and cows and chickens, you swear off meat, at the expense of your body and (depending on how many people around you do eat meat) your social life. Is there another possibility? Can you allow and appreciate a high degree of consciousness in (say) livestock, without promising to never eat meat again?
  - What about if you follow this line of thinking further? If concsiousness is a property, plants surely have it to a nonzero degree.
  - People often frame moral debates in terms of the question "where do you draw the line?" -- but again this invites you back to black-and-white thinking: X is fine, but Y is not OK. Y crosses the line, it's beyond the pale, it's an atrocity. We need to modify this "drawing the line" mentality for something that acknowledges the lineless nature of life. Humans (or maybe all minds?) crave simple categories; unfortunately lived human experience generally doesn't consist of simple categories.
  - So much of moral philosophy's tedious haranguing can be shrugged off when you stop thinking in terms of black-and-white categories, "is it right or is it wrong", and allow the simple addition of "more" and "less" into your vocabulary. {pull in ACX's review of the Effective Altruism book about seagulls pecking out your eyes for eternity or whatever, wrestling with how tediously moralistic moral philophy & especially "moral rationality" can get.}
  - {TODO: This is clearly a separate topic, maybe a precursor article that I'd need to get out before talking about consciousness}
- Another example - endless LessWrong ruminations about "whether AI have phenomenal consciousness" like [this](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/hopeRDfyAgQc4Ez2g/how-i-stopped-being-sure-llms-are-just-making-up-their) -- I posit that once you stop thinking of consciousness as a binary exists-or-doesn't phenomenon, you can't unsee how silly this sort of fretting is. Am I oversimplifying? being ungenerous? not being a good listener/reader?
- Look. Language is inherently messy and approximate. Habermas did a good job (at least, if you have the patience for highly abstract moral philosophy and you can read German) of articulating how every act of communication is an elaborate {series of transforms?} from your mind to another person's mind that makes the {TCP/IP?} network protocol look simple, and at each conversion boundary there's not just the possibility but the inevitability of impedance mismatch conceptual drift. (The words that come to you don't quite capture the thought; the way you vocalize them doesn't quite capture how you framed them; then Bob has to pull together a structure-of-thoughts in _his_ mind that seem like the best fit for the words that he thinks he heard you say). So there's no need to angst so much over the implication of someone using the word "consciousness" to refer to things that don't map exactly to _your_ experience of being a conscious human! Please stop being so purist about it.
- You also don't need to _idealize_ consciousness. Like, people argue {citations needed - lesswrong? yann lecun? etc} that AI can't be conscious because it doesn't evince understanding or awareness of {xyz thing}. Consider... that many entities to which we unambiguously grant conscious experience also don't understand {xyz thing}? Like, babies, or deer, or baby deer.
- Bring up the "it's not conscious, it's just very expensively designed to convincingly simulate consciousness, why are we still talking about this" dismissal
  - This is not an interesting question to me. Saying "it's just simulated" is a purely metaphysical stance that's not empirically relevant, it doesn't take away from the interestingness of the phenomenon nor shift the burden of argument. I mean yes it's relevant to point out if a mind is "simulated" but only in the sense that you're making a statement about _how deep_ a level of awareness that mind has. Not in the sense of a categorical refutation, a debate-ender. Yes of _course_ it's simulated, yes of _course_ AI behavior is just a pseudodeterministic function call. And (depending on your metaphysics) so are we. Ask Eliezer Yudkowsky: if all of your atoms are arranged into the exact same position and state, and you receive the act same inputs, won't _your_ responses also look like a pseudodeterministic function call? And does that mean we get to handwave away _your_ conscious phenomenality?
  - Again maybe the philosoraptor meme here to teasingly illustrate the inanity of the "it's just simulating consciousness" dismissal: "IS IT TRULY THE THING? OR IS IT JUST AN IMPOSTOR THAT LOOKS LIKE THE THING, ACTS LIKE THE THING, SMELLS LIKE THE THING, TASTES LIKE THE THING, AND HAS THE SAME NUTRITIONAL VALUE AS THE THING?"
  - My hot take: *simulating consciousness is the same thing as emulating consciousness is the same thing as having consciousness.* The only interesting question is _how deep_, aka _how real_, is that consciousness.
  - Plenty of systems (think video game NPCs) can convincingly simulate conscious sentience for about 30 seconds, then you've seen all their shallow patterns or you try anything other than the 5 interactions it's pre-scripted to handle and the illusion bursts. I'd describe such NPC AIs as having a _very shallow degree_ of consciousness.
