
- Start from the footnote in "They're just predicting tokens" in my 2026-02-03 Moltbook article.

- Frame it as a reply to the Yann LeCun and this argument https://substack.com/home/post/p-187213882 (but find a more authoritative voice dismissing AI as "just token prediction")

- It's inane to argue that AIs are "just token prediction". Like, yes, obviously the substrate is token prediction. And also, the substrate is electrons flowing through logic gates on silicon chips. And also, the substrate is efficiently simulated neural networks designed with some brilliant tunings & optimizations. But you could just as easily say [link to Surfing Uncertainty, and the theory of predictive processing] that to the best of our knowledge, human thought is "just electrical signals" passing through our messy and inefficient homegrown neural networks, and our inner experience of consciousness is a mirage we'll never escape.

- (Yes, I know, humans also have an undying soul and are capable of things that computers will probably never be capable of. Please set aside for a moment your spiritual beliefs and the reams of compelling parapsychology evidence you have sitting in the corner of your office, and imagine that you're an unapologetic atheist who firmly believes that humans are made of meat and neurons and nothing more, and our consciousness is epiphenomenal to the substrate of our anatomy.)

- On the AI topic - you might enjoy skimming this article which I found fascinating: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/hopeRDfyAgQc4Ez2g/how-i-stopped-being-sure-llms-are-just-making-up-their - it makes the case that you can use various experimental techniques to get insight into LLMs' "internal thought processes", and what you find (a) strongly indicate that (at least in some cases) LLMs do have "internal thought processes", (b) when you ask them what they were thinking, they're not purely inventing answers "from the outside", rather they're doing something analogus to introspection into their past thought patterns to try to figure out what they were thinking when they said XYZ; and (c) those internal layers of thought patterns are not "words" per se, they're more akin to "wiring" (even though the original input and final output ARE generally words - and the structural parallels with nonverbal AIs emphasize that last point)

- As per research outlined here https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/K2JBqDeETX2yEgyyZ/the-limits-of-introspection humans also confabulate their introspection a lot of the time. So what does it mean to say that LLMs aren't really thinking when by all accounts they're thinking just as well as we are, and are prone to some of the same pitfalls even if you set aside the structural comparisons?
